Hello friends! Three years ago I
installed a bear-proof door on my log
cabin that I'm building in the remote
location of Karelia the door has a
time-tested design with a couple of
interesting design ideas that are worth
mentioning here a few words for my
first-time viewers I've been developing
my log cabin camp in the northern forest
away from people and roads since 2014
during our short summer we have White
Nights so I could accomplish a lot even
in the span of one month summer vacation
here are a few examples of what I was
able to build here in five years I made
this primitive fire-carved log furniture
using trees downed by a severe storm I
built dam and a small pond with a
step-down ladder at the local stream
built a hybrid tent / bed from
recycled materials such as this
PET rope cut from plastic bottles
I also made a storage dome for slabs and
boards using sticks and stretch film in
addition I cleaned the campsite from
fallen trees which I recycled for my
log cabin construction I decided to
build my cabin without chopping down a
single live tree using a round notch
reinforced with a square peg also known
as the saddle cope many of the downed
trees were huge
which is why my cabin was atypically
built from extra-thick logs the roof was
built from halved logs with a polymer
underlayment installed under the sod to
protect the roof members from moisture
and UV light some of my other bushcraft
projects didn't get into this footage
but I will leave the links below let's
get back to the door story while
installing the bottom logs I drilled a
mortise for the door's bottom wooden
hinge and the upper mortise was drilled
a year later so now we need a door with
two rounded build-in tenons
that will act as primitive hinges to
complete the set two years ago I cut
narrow boards using a primitive sawmill
jig made from two jointed boards and a
couple of screws
however these boards are too narrow for
my door design I wanted to make it bear-proof using only two extra wide boards
that milled and dried last summer
I even bought a more powerful chainsaw
with a longer guide bar to be able to
milll extra wide slabs before milling
slabs I resharpened an original crosscut chain to 10 degrees using my
improvised vise made from a stump
besides acquiring a better chainsaw for
the task
I made a sawmill similar to the Logosol or Alaskan Mill however I realized
the jig will not work well for the
boards required width as my Stihl MS260 couldn't handle even smaller than
needed logs that's okay though as I know
how to cut slabs freehand it is time to
go to the place where I found a huge
dried pine my traditional packframe
made from pine planks a bird cherry
branch and a rope cut from the bottle
will help me to bring my tools food and
video equipment to the site in one trip
I highly recommend you to make or buy a
packframe if you do similar activities
in the woods
I found this dried pine last summer not
far from my camp the bottom section has
started to rot but the rest of the trunk
is still intact and dry it is quite
dense to
it is not difficult to cut a branchless
tree trunk all you have to do is to cut
out a deep wedge on one side and make a
partial straight cut a little higher on
the opposite side of the trunk then you
simply hammer in a wedge into the
straight cut this is one of the easiest
and safest ways to cut down a tree
however if the tree is asymmetrical in
shape or has a lot of its branches on
one side you will might need to use a
different method I dropped this dried
pine on a few skinny logs that I laid
out in advance this way it will be easier
to mill the door slabs later I have two
doorways in my cabin so I need to cut
four wide slabs for two doors I cut the
slabs longer than needed as you can
always cut them shorter naturally dried
northern pine is called "Kelo" in
Finnish because it is considered to be
valuable in natural circumstances very
old pine trees usually die while
standing and then slowly dry for years
"Kelo" logs and slabs are fairly dense and
don't crack as they lose wood stresses
during natural drying processes over the
years while standing vertically the core
of the "Kelo" is light while the sapwood
is colored gray by fungus that lived
there during the drying process the
fungus has been dead in it for years and
you can safely use this slab for
construction I actually kind of like
it's golden-grayishglow when you apply
oil on it you can tell that the "Kelo"
board is very old and has seen a lot
during its lifespan all of the "Kelo's"
sap has fully crystallized by now making
the wood extra dense which means you
have to resharpen your carpentry tools
more frequently
I have shown how to effectively cut a
log into boards without any sawmill
attachments in one of my previous videos
I will leave a link to it below in case
you wanted to see it in more detail for
now I will just say this it is easier
and faster to cut large slabs with the
bottom tip of your chainsaw using
swinging motions than when using mini
sawmill attachments this free-handed
slab cutting technique is three times
faster and takes half the amount of gas
those are the numerical facts I was able
to measure okay
the last slab is milled and I can now
check their quality and geometry all four
slabs passed my quality control and now it
is time to take them back to the camp
closer to my log cabin I put the glove
under the slab to cushion my shoulder
and started to make my way back while
carrying the slab I couldn't help to be
glad that the "Kelo" wood is so dry and
comparatively light also I was happy
that this log was located right in the
trail that I cleared a few years ago so
I didn't have to struggle through shrubs
or a typical Karelian rocky terrain
those soothing thoughts were giving me
needed strength and again a few good
words about my trusty packframe after
feeling pretty tired from carrying the
first slab I decided to carry the rest
of them using my packframe's upper arch
as a back support this unusual carrying
technique is a lot more ergonomic
spreading the slab's weight evenly on my
arms and shoulders there was another log
section from the same tree that I wanted
to mill into slabs but I had to leave it
to rot there because my Stihl MS 260 failed me the next day look at
what happened to its cylinder-piston group
Stihl service told me I was using a bad
fuel mixture but they couldn't explain
to me why the same fuel mixture poured
from one tank didn't do any damage to my
20 year old Stihl MS 180 I wonder if
the real reason is that the new MS 260
was made in Brazil while my trusty MS
180 was still made in the USA two
decades ago there is no time to get
upset though I need to make a temporary
woodworking bench under the open sky I
just milled a horizontal surface on a
fallen tree and stretched a tent above
it to get an all-weather temporary
woodworking shop with a steady workbench
while making my door with round tenon
hinges I decided to cut out the round
tenons first this way the large board
is cut to its size and it is easier to
shift it around on my workbench I took
my time to the layout job because there
was only one chance to do it right I
don't have spare dried boards of that
size laying around this is when the
carpenter's mantra "Measure twice cut once"
really came in handy I made a couple of
precise cuts and carefully shaped the
round tenon this slab got noticeably
lighter there will be two tenons on the
door so I shaped the second tenon in
the same way the second board just
needed to be cut to size to tightly fit
the doorway that was installed into the
cabin two years ago this old
inexpensive hand plane is still doing a
decent job in smoothing the slab ideally
a jointer plane would be better but
it was too heavy to bring it here so I
will have to work with what I have it is
a pleasure to make shavings with a hand
plane arguably it is the most classical
woodworking activity out of them all now
we can shape the square tenons using a
handsaw a chisel
and a hammer note the tenons are 52
millimeters (two inches) in diameter while
this slab is 80 millimeters (three in a
quarter) each tenon is cut asymmetrically
to be flush with the inner side of the
door such asymmetry is needed to
maximize the door's range of motion and
to prevent air drafting okay both door
tenons / hinges are cut and we can join
both boards together my new two and a
half inch wide (6 cm) chisel
would have come in handy now but I still
managed to do a decent job with a small
chisel back then I cut the angled sides
of the sliding dovetail joint using a
regular hacksaw I know it is not an
ideal saw to make such cuts but again
I used what I had at my disposal
it is raining but everything is dry in
my woodworking shop thanks to the canopy
stretched over and I can start to fit my
sliding dovetail joint I rubbed a piece
of charcoal on the plank and it will
show where the plank is getting tight
inside the sliding dovetail all you have
to do is to use a sharp chisel to
slightly remove the marked area and
methodically repeat the procedure till
you achieve the desired fit chiseling is
a simple but tedious work that I kind of
welcome in such times when it is raining
outside and I can't really do any other
projects at the camp or in the woods of
course it is not necessary to have such
a perfect joint fit in the log cabin's
door but since I'm enjoying this process
and I have time why not
when I finished fitting the horizontal
door rails I rounded over the door's back
edge the rounded edge will allow the
door to open all the way note it is
important not to remove too much of the
door's material as it could result in creating a
gap between the door and the doorway in the
closed position
okay the rain finally stopped and I can
take the hinged
board to the log cabin and try it on I
would say the slab lost almost half of
its weight by feel through the whole
process or perhaps I was too excited to
start the door fitting I tried the board
in the doorway many times each time
making small adjustments to the wooden
hinges but it was an enjoyable activity
I've never seen doors with build-in wooden
hinges before which is why even a
partial success would have made me happy
as a continues the door fitting process I
grew to like its primitive and reliable
design even anymore when you come to
knock on such a door you could instantly
tell that people who live in the house
are hardly superficial in order to do
the full installation of the door with
built-in wooden hinges I had to lift a
large sum of weight
this included the doorway's head along
with the whole roof that is made of logs
and halved logs plus the weight of the wet
sod as you probably guessed I used two
wedges to accomplish this task the wedges
have to be strong so I made them from
the oiliest branches that I could find
I will be honest I enjoyed that
fidgeting process and even thought to
myself that perhaps the second door
should be a double door like in a saloon
but maybe I watched too many Westerns
back in the day I owe you an explanation as to
why I'm making two doors in my log cabin
and why they open outside some will say
they need to open inwards especially in
this area where snow can block in the door
from outside why do you think I made
them open outwards nevertheless?
talk to me in the comments below I'd
like to hear your version I probably
tired you with my comments by now so I
will let you watch the rest of the
fitting process without them
okay now we can assemble two slabs and
two rails into the door to avoid gaps I
decided to plane matching grooves and
put a spline in between the boards I've
never used a plough plane before but I
like cutting long grooves with it a lot
a plough plane is a very simple tool it's
literally a chisel-like cutter affixed
in a jig at an angle plus an adjustable
side rail if you leave the side rail in
the same position and make two long
grooves in both boards they will
inevitably match like a mirror image
okay now I will make short perpendicular
splines to install them into the
corresponding grooves at that stage I
had some difficulties because my
makeshift workbench was not specialized
enough for the task and I was using a
ratchet strap to hold down a short plank
this is when I decided to make a shaving
horse the next season here is a little
preview how it was made the next summer
if there is enough interest in my
audience I will make a separate video
about the shaving horse
but let's get back to the door project I
finally have all of the necessary door
members in place and it is time to put
it all together if I had made any
mistakes in my calculations I would have
to make another door as the doorway is
already installed but the careful
measuring and layout paid off and this
door turned out to be nearly perfect in
its dimensions the assembly process is
fairly straightforward and I will let
you watch it while enjoying the sounds
of pure bushcrafting I will only add
that I reinforced the rails with dowels
and made sure there is an adequate gap
between the door and doorway to
compensate for seasonal wood expansion
and contraction this is Max Egorov from
Saint Petersburg Russia if you liked
this video perhaps you could share it
with your friends let good people
watch good videos p.s. I only produce
one or two videos max a month and if you
don't want to miss new content like this
subscribe and click the notification
bell to stay up to date with all of the
latest content due to new youtube's
recommendation algorithm its
notifications  have become more erratic
and unstable otherwise I hope to see
back on Advoko MAKES...